.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE.md, before:

### Please fill out this form:

### Expected behavior

### Actual behavior

### Steps to reproduce the behavior

### Crash bugs

If this is a crash bug, and you have the time and inclination, please provide a
symblic backtrace.

Instructions for doing so are
[here](https://github.com/visualboyadvance-m/visualboyadvance-m/blob/master/README.md#reporting-crash-bugs).

### ROM details

Which games are affected by the issue (please state if GBA or GB game):

Which games, if any, are NOT affected by the issue (please state if GBA or GB game):

Include screenshots of ROM Information (File > ROM Information):

### Option details

Video driver (simple, opengl):

Sound driver (directsound, xaudio, openal, SDL):

### Build details

Operating System (Windows, Mac, Linux (state distribution), etc.):

If using Linux, specify if using xorg or Wayland:

Version of code (pre-built binary version, or commit ref, or just "master"):

### Hardware details:

If your joystick or gamepad isn't working in Linux, please try to troubleshoot
using the information on this page:
https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Gamepad **BEFORE** filing an issue. We use
SDL for joystick support, any problems will generally be an issue with SDL and
**NOT** the emulator.

If relevant, the joystick you are using and the drivers you are using for it:

Commit message:

fix lang in changelog, add bios to issue template
Fix changelog for last release being generated in the russian locale.

Ask users in the issue template what bios they are using, because this
can affect things like link.

Signed-off-by: Rafael Kitover <rkitover@gmail.com>

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE.md, after:

### Please fill out this form:

### Expected behavior

### Actual behavior

### Steps to reproduce the behavior

### Crash bugs

If this is a crash bug, and you have the time and inclination, please provide a
symblic backtrace.

Instructions for doing so are
[here](https://github.com/visualboyadvance-m/visualboyadvance-m/blob/master/README.md#reporting-crash-bugs).

### ROM details

Which games are affected by the issue (please state if GBA or GB game):

Which games, if any, are NOT affected by the issue (please state if GBA or GB game):

Include screenshots of ROM Information (File > ROM Information):

If you are using a BIOS file, please say which one.

### Option details

Video driver (simple, opengl):

Sound driver (directsound, xaudio, openal, SDL):

### Build details

Operating System (Windows, Mac, Linux (state distribution), etc.):

If using Linux, specify if using xorg or Wayland:

Version of code (pre-built binary version, or commit ref, or just "master"):

### Hardware details:

If your joystick or gamepad isn't working in Linux, please try to troubleshoot
using the information on this page:
https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Gamepad **BEFORE** filing an issue. We use
SDL for joystick support, any problems will generally be an issue with SDL and
**NOT** the emulator.

If relevant, the joystick you are using and the drivers you are using for it:
